docs: :memo: clarify guide on resource-level metadata (#1597)
seedcase-project/seedcase-sprout: docs/guide/resources.qmd

---
title: "Resource metadata"
order: 3
jupyter: python3
---

## What is a data resource

So far, we have seen how to create and manage package metadata for our

> data package. In this section, we will learn about how we can add data files

Reviewer: ```suggestion
data package. In this section, we will look at how we can add data files
```
Maybe?

resources](/docs/glossary.qmd), each which contains a conceptually distinct set
of data.

## Creating a data resource with Sprout

### Converting data to the correct format

Creating a data resource requires that your data is in the correct format.
Usually, generated or collected data starts out in a "raw" shape that needs to
be cleaned and organized into so called "tidy data" before it can become a data
resource. How to tidy data will differ from dataset to dataset and is outside
the scope of Sprout, so we will not cover the procedure in detail here. Ideally
you would use a Python package such as
[Polars](https://decisions.seedcase-project.org/why-polars-for-data-cleaning/).
to tidy your data, so that you have a record of the steps taken to clean and
transform the data. After cleaning, your [data should follow the specification
outlined in our
documentation](https://sprout.seedcase-project.org/docs/design/interface/inputs)

For this guide, you will use (fake) data that is already tidy. You can
[find the data
here](https://raw.githubusercontent.com/seedcase-project/data/refs/heads/main/patients/patients.csv).

> We've placed this data in a `raw/` folder in the data package and called

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
We've placed this data in a `raw/` folder in the Data Package and called
```

```

And the `raw/patients.csv` file includes data about patients with diabetes,
which look like this:

```{python}
#| echo: false
raw_data_patients
```

### Defining metadata properties for the data resource

Before you can store a data file as a resource in your data package, you need to
describe its [metadata properties](/docs/glossary.qmd). The resource's metadata
are what allow other people to understand what your data is about and to
use it more easily.

The resource's metadata also define what it means for data in the resource to
be correctly entered, as all data in the resource must match the metadata
properties. Sprout checks that the metadata properties are correctly filled in
and that no required metadata fields are missing. It also checks that the data
in the data resources matches the metadata properties, so that you can be sure
that data actually contains what you expect it to contain. These checks can
protect you from human errors introduced when adding new data or editing an
existing data resource.

> ### Creating a script to help manage data-level metadata

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
### Creating a script to manage the metadata
```

This guide is already about the resource, so this header can be simplified.

data resource's properties script. Since a data package can contain multiple
resources, the resource's `name` must also be unique.

Building upon the `main.py` file we created in the previous section, we will go
ahead and add the `create_resource_properties_script()` step to the pipeline:

```{python}
#| eval: false
#| filename: "main.py"
import seedcase_sprout as sp
from scripts.package_properties import package_properties

def main():
    sp.create_properties_script()                                    # <1>
    sp.create_resource_properties_script(resource_name="patients")   # <2>
    ...                                                              # <3>
if __name__ == "__main__":
    main()
```

1. We already had this line in our script from the previous section of the
   guide.
2. This is the only new line of code. It creates the resource properties
   script. Note that the script is only created once, it will not be
   overwritten if it already exists.
3. We have removed the writing of `datapackage.json` and the creation of the
   readme to make it easier to see what is new. You will learn how to write the

>    data-level metadata and the readme later in this guide.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
   resource-level metadata and the README later in this guide.
```

`resource_name`, i.e. "patients". If you view the content of
`scripts/resource_properties_patients.py`, you will see that it looks similar
to the package-level metadata script, but with different names for the metadata
properties. Since the file content is somewhat lengthy, it's hidden by default
on this page and you can click the banner below to show it.

::: {.callout-tip icon=false collapse=true}

## `scripts/resource_properties_patients.py`
```{python}
#| echo: false
#| output: asis
#| filename: "scripts/resource_properties_patients.py"
print(
    '```python',
    package_path.resource_properties_script('patients').read_text(),
    '```',
    sep='\n'
)
```

:::

As with the template for the package-level metadata, the comments in this file
indicates which properties are required and which are optional. You can see
that you would need to fill out a `title` and a `description` just as we did
previously for the package-level metadata. However, you also need to fill out
the `name` and the `type` inside `FieldProperties` (a "field" is the same as a
"column" or "variable" in your dataset). Doing this manually can be tedious for

> datasets with many columns, so sprout provides a way to extract this metadata

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
datasets with many columns, so Sprout provides a way to extract this metadata
```

directly from the data file.

### Extracting column metadata directly from the data

To ease the process of adding `fields` to your resource metadata, Sprout
provides a function called `extract_field_properties()`, which allows you to
extract metadata from each column in your dataset. To use this function, we need to read in our data as a Polars DataFrame and clean it until we are happy with the name and data type for each column.

> In the code snippet below, we have added all the required steps to our `main.py` file.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
In the code chunk below, we've added all the required steps to our `main.py` file.
```

protect you from human errors introduced when adding new data or editing an
existing data resource.

### Creating a script to help manage resource metadata

As we did for the package metadata, you will create a script to manage the

> resource medata. You can do this by using the

Reviewer: ```suggestion
As you did for the package metadata, you will create a script to manage the
resource medata. You can do this by using the
```
Maybe? At least the switch from "we" to "you" feels a bit odd to me here :)

`create_resource_properties_script()` function. This function needs the
`resource_name` parameter to specify the name of the resource, which is used to
identify the resource in the data package. It is required and *should not* be
changed, since it's used in the file name of the data resource's properties

> script. Since a data package can contain multiple resources, the resource's

Reviewer: ```suggestion
script. Because a data package can contain multiple resources, the resource's
```
Just to avoid since x 2 (used in the previous sentence as well)

print(file_tree(package_path.root()))
```

If you now open `scripts/resource_properties_patients.py`, you will see that field properties are added for all the columns in the data. The fields that could be automatically extracted also have their metadata filled our already, in this case the `name` and `type`:

::: {.callout-tip icon=false collapse=true}
## `scripts/resource_properties_patients.py`

```{python}
#| echo: false
#| output: asis
#| filename: "scripts/resource_properties_patients.py"
print(
    '```python',
    package_path.resource_properties_script('patients').read_text(),
    '```',
    sep='\n'
)
```
:::

> ## Writing the data-level metadata to `datapackage.json`

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
## Writing the metadata to `datapackage.json`
```

`CheckError` when you try to use `write_properties()` to save the resource's
properties to the `datapackage.json` file. You will understand these errors
more deeply after reading the next section in the guide; for now focus on
making sure that the three required fields above are all filled out.

:::

Our resource properties file include the `name`, `title`, and `description` of
that data resource together with the `name` and `type` of each field in the
data resource. To write these data-level metadata to `datapackage.json`, you need to
include the resource properties in the `package_properties.py` file of your data
package. You can do this by adding the following lines to the `properties.py`
file:

```{python}
#| eval: false
#| filename: "package_properties.py"
# Import the resource properties object.
from scripts.resource_properties_patients import resource_properties_patients

package_properties = sp.PackageProperties(
    # Your existing package metadata goes here...
    resources=[
        resource_properties_patients,
    ],
)
```

You can click the banner below to view the full file at this point:

::: {.callout-tip icon=false collapse=true}

> ## `scripts/package_properties.py`

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
## Inside the `package_properties.py` script
```
